---
title: Searchex Version 0.0.1
---

Right before the New Year, you may have heard cheering and corks popping.  That
was the sound of Searchex Version 0.0.1 being released!

## Minimum Viable Product

This release really fits the definition of "Minimum Viable Product".  Version
0.0.1 is capable of indexing a few thousand documents from your hard drive.  It
is usable for testing, but not production.  The [Searchex Roadmap][roadmap]
shows there is much to be done.

But we're off to a good start, and I'm certain we have a strong foundation for
the work to come.  Here are some highlights...

## Searchex Middleware

Full-text search relies on layers of dependencies:

    results <- query <- index <- catalog <- params <- documents

At each step in the chain, you want parameter validation and cache
generation.  The abstraction needs to be easily composable, to allow
flexibility to swap components in and out of the chain.

In searching for a solution I rewrote this middleware code like six times, not
exaggerating.  At the end of the day, I realized that the best comparable for
our needs is [Plug][plug], the middleware used in the Phoenix framework.

The Searchex middleware is called `Shake`. Here are the core differences
between `Shake` and `Plug`:

- Shake is optimized for validation and caching at every level
- Instead of the `conn` object, Shake uses a `frame` struct optimized for
  search ([Frame documentation][frame])

See the [Shake documentation][shake] to learn more.

## LRU Cache

At every level of the build chain, we use LRU Caching with auto-expiring keys -
inspired by Rails.  Instead of Redis as a cache store, we use ETS/DETS.  Cache
keys are build from the content digest of the child layer.

Caches improve execution speed by orders of magnitude.  The cache just works in
the background - there's nothing special that needs to be done by the end-user.  

Currently the LRU Cache handles Erlang terms, but not OTP processes.  In
the future we will require an 'LRU Registry' to auto-expire process trees.

## Sharable Repos

Searchex uses a two-level organization for searchable assets: `Repos` ->
`Collections`.

A `Repo` is simply a Git repo that has one or more `Collections`.  Each
collection is defined by a `config` file, a yaml file which defined parameters
for the collection - document file names, search paths, regular expressions,
field definitions, etc.

See the [Config Documentation][config] to learn more.  Browse an [example
repo][example] on GitHub.

The repo/collection system lays the foundation for distributed search, document
sharing.

## Next Steps

Going forward, we'll generally follow the [Searchex Roadmap][roadmap], adding
new capabilities bit by bit.  

[roadmap]: https://github.com/elixir-search/searchex#roadmap
[shake]:   https://hexdocs.pm/searchex/Shake.html#content
[frame]:   https://hexdocs.pm/searchex/Shake.Frame.html#content
[config]:  https://hexdocs.pm/searchex/Searchex.Config.html#content
[plug]:    https://www.phoenixframework.org/v0.11.0/docs/understanding-plug
[example]: https://github.com/elixir-search/sample
